Hello everyone, my name is Jen Kramer.
I am the director of Learning Design and
Technology at AnnieCannons.
And this is Grid and Flexbox for
responsive design here
at Frontend Masters.
I'm thrilled to be presenting this
third version of this course.
The first time I taught this was in 2017.
Right back when Flexbox was really the
focus of what we did for web page layouts,
we were just starting to dig into
grid as a thing to layout web pages.
Now that it's 2024,
our focus really should be on Grid for
laying out web pages.
Flexbox is gonna handle a few
exceptions to the rule and so
we're gonna talk a lot
about that in this course.
The website for this course is
at grid-flexbox.css.education.
On this website, you'll find all of
the background behind the course, and
you will find down here a listing of all
the various chapters with links to all of
the CodePens that we'll be
working on in this course.
This course does focus pretty
much on CodePen as a way for
learning Grid and Flexbox and
also container queries, subgrid, and
responsive images along the way.
And the reason why is because we can just
jump right into CodePen and see what we're
doing while we're coding and there's
nothing to install and nothing to set up.
We won't be building whole web pages in
this course will be building parts of
webpages so
that we can understand how Grid and
Flexbox really work in smaller
environments, all right.
So if we get started here,
we're going to start with chapter one.
If you wanna click on that link there,
and you'll
see here I wanna talk a little bit about
the history of responsive design and.
Kind of remind you of where we've been so
that we can learn where we're going.
There are slides that are here available
for you if you wanna download them and
follow along.
And we'll refer back to this deck
a couple of times here in this course.
So I started in this industry
in the year 2000 and so
it is now year 24 that I have
been coding for the web.
And when I graduated from my
master's degree program in 2001,
the state of the web was really maybe
5% of the tools that we have today.
We were using tables for layouts.
We were using FTP to move our
files up to a web server and
there was really almost no CSS
support at all inside of web browsers.
CSS has always kind of been behind the
curve in terms of support inside of web
browsers and at that particular point in
time our web browsers were a big deal.
You had to download them,
you had to install them,
you had to consciously
update your browser and so
things were always just very behind in
terms of everything that we had in 2001.
Wait, we got to 2008 fortunately,
we've made some progress.
We finally ditch table-based layouts and
we were looking more at
float-based layouts.
A lot of our building was done inside of
content management systems like WordPress,
Joomla and Drupal.
And jQuery was the hot thing of
the day because jQuery dressed a lot
of issues for us.
Prior to this if you were working with
regular JavaScript browsers had different
ideas of what
the Document Object Model looked like.
You had a Document Object Model for
Netscape and you had a different one for
IE so JavaScript was just a nightmare and
a disaster.
One of the big problems that jQuery
solved was that we finally had a tool
that was actually cross
browser compatible.
Of course,
Netscape was mostly gone by then we were
back to Mozilla at that point in time.
Once we get to 2010,
we wound up with the iPhone for
the first time the iPad was
shortly coming along there.
And Ethan Marcotte wrote
his famous article from
A List Apart that defined this
concept of responsive design.
And it consisted of
a flexible grid-based layout,
media queries and images that resize.
And what was radical about this idea at
that point in time was that there was
a single code base that could address
all of the devices all at once.
Prior to this we, separate code bases
usually something like jQuery Mobile.
Which would build the entire mobile
website and then you'd have your separate
desktop website, two separate code bases
frequently even if you had a database
behind it that would serve up different
content to those different form factors.
It was still kind of a nightmare
to keep things in sync.
So responsive design helped us put
everything behind one particular codebase.
And we started to think about
responsive design this way,
which was starting with
our grid-based layouts.
So in 2010,
we did this with float-based layouts and
floats for layouts is truly a hack.
And it was it's kind of a nightmare, and
no one really understands how floats work.
They forget that you have
to clear if you float.
And so Bootstrap wound up addressing
that issue really effectively.
People were so happy that they finally had
something that could work for layout and
they didn't have to try to
figure it out on their own.
Between 2014 and 2017 the grid-based
layouts were largely coded with Flexbox.
And we were still kind of obsessed
with Bootstrap at that point in time.
And that was because
Grid was a new spec and
it was still reaching
some of the web browsers.
By 2018, we had support for
Grid pretty much in all of the web
browsers at that point in time.
And now moving on,
we've got support for size queries,
container size queries
that's at February 2023.
And subgrid got support in all the major
browsers by September of 2023.
We are at a point in time where
we need to start pivoting and
starting to use some of these newer
tools that really were designed for
laying out whole web pages like Grid.
The other part of this
is images that resize.
And there was a whole long stretch of
time where this was a disaster but
today we have solutions that are solid,
stable,
cross-browser compatible and
they're in the HTML of all things.
So the picture element is one of these
ways of creating images that resize and
also sizes and source set.
Finally, we have media queries.
I always like to point out with media
queries because people are generally
familiar with them at this point in time.
They're familiar with min
width media queries or
max width media queries where we're
querying the size of the viewport.
But there's also various other
kinds of media queries as well.
You can test on height,
aspect ratio, orientation,
colors and various kinds of
print characteristics as well.
These have continued to grow over time for
media queries.
How does Ethan Marcotte's definition
of responsive design hold up today?
Well, we take typically are doing
our grid-based layouts using various
kinds of CSS frameworks.
We're using Tailwind a lot of the time,
Bootstrap to a lesser extent some
people are starting to use CSS Grid.
The images that resize
often get forgotten.
It is important, especially if you're
gonna use some of those great big giant
banner images that are very large in file
size that we use images that resize.
For some reason, developers seem to
be trying to avoid media queries.
I'm not entirely sure why that is.
They don't add a lot to
the performance of the web page and
they are pretty straightforward to manage.
But I think a lot of people think that
media queries are defined by your
framework and
that they can't be changed perhaps.
And then of course, there's always
the attitude that container queries and
subgrid will solve all of our problems and
we will live in a perfect world
of rainbows and unicorns.
And I'm here to tell you that
that's never going to be the case,
nothing is ever perfect, okay.
So consider these as guiding principles
as you start to think about laying out
web pages.
That we wanna start with CSS Grid as
our first tool in laying out web pages.
Sometimes we'll use Flexbox and we're
gonna talk about when that is appropriate
but Grid should be the first
tool that you reach for.
As you think about the images that resize
consider using the picture element,
sizes and source set which are attributes
that go inside of the image element.
And then you can start thinking about
media queries and container queries.
We'll go into the difference between those
and how they work later on in this course.
Let's talk about this Flexbox
versus Grid thing, okay?
That's not Flexbox and Grid up there,
those are developers that are hashing
it out up there on the screen.
Flexbox and Grid are two perfectly
good specs, they're totally awesome,
they are modern, they're up to date
you should be using both of them.
But we seem to have a lot of conflict in
the community about which is better, and
which should we be using, and
which one should we leave behind.
So I made a little bit of controversy
here recently on one of these
social media platforms when
I said that it's 2024 and
we should be teaching
students Grid from the start.
We shouldn't start with Flexbox
we ought to start with Grid.
Because Flexbox is really an exception for
most layouts.
Grid was designed to lay out web pages we
should be laying out web pages with Grid.
And of course we had
people who had comments to
say about that particular kind of stuff.
So this particular person thought
that there's more work involved for
varying viewport sizes using Grid versus
Flex and shifts in layout construction.
I'm here to tell you that
that is in fact not true.
I'm sorry that you were not taught
appropriately how Grid works.
Flexbox and Grid in terms of their
HTML markup can be extremely similar.
It's the CSS that's gonna change.
We're gonna take a look at
that in a lot of great detail.
If you think about Grid and
all the things that it can do, by the way,
it does a whole lot.
I'm not even gonna be able to cover
all the things that Grid does in this
particular course.
Those things tend to be where
you're trying to use Flexbox,
Flexbox does a much
smaller subset of that.
And there are some things
that Flexbox does better and
does uniquely that Grid does not do.
So basically, what I'm suggesting here is
that where you can go either with Grid or
Flextbox go with Grid.
Where you need to use Flexbox because
that's your only choice use Flexbox, okay?
So that is all I have to be
saying things change over time.
Your bootcamp taught you Flexbox
in 2015 because of cross browser
compatibility to just the way it was.
Bootstrap use Flexbox
because of browser support.
Grid was designed for web page layouts.
HTML tables, floats, Flexbox were
never designed for web page layouts.
Grid is the first tool that
was designed for that.
And sorry for
the last 20 years of hacks before this,
who knew that we wanted
to lay out web pages?
But finally, we have addressed
this particular issue with Grid